W-11599455 try scope revamp and ref duke (#2386)
mulesoft/docs-mule-runtime-3: modules/ROOT/pages/try-scope-concept.adoc

ifndef::env-site,env-github[]
include::_attributes.adoc[]
endif::[]
//:page-aliases: try-scope-xml-reference.adoc

The Try scope (`<try />`) sequentially executes one or more connector operations or Mule components (processors) that you add to the scope.

> The Try scope enables transaction management and error handling for processing within the scope. xref:transaction-management.adoc[Transactions] force a group of processors to succeed or fail as a unit. The scope accepts xref:xa-transactions.adoc[Extended Architecture (XA)] and, by default, xref:single-resource-transaction.adoc[Local (LOCAL)] transactions.

Author: TODO: move and consolidate details about the transaction types into the Transaction section.

The Try scope's error handling capability is useful for components, such as the xref:for-each-scope-concept.adoc[For Each scope], that do not propagate errors to the flow's error handler and within other components, such as xref:flow-component.adoc#subflow-configuration[Subflow], that do not provide their own error handler. The Try scope can also help you isolate errors that occur within error-prone operations.

[[architecture]]
== Architecture

The Try scope has the following XML structure:

[source,xml,linenums]
----

> <try>

Author: With implicit defaults for the transaction type and action (minus doc:id attribute): 
<try doc:name="Try" />

With the attributes...
<try doc:name="Try"  transactionalAction="BEGIN_OR_JOIN" transactionType="XA"/>

  <!-- COMPONENTS TO TRY TO USE -->
  <error-handler>
    <on-error-continue>
      <!-- COMPONENTS TO USE IN CASE OF ERROR -->
    </on-error-continue>
    <on-error-propagate>
      <!-- COMPONENTS TO USE IN CASE OF ERROR -->
    </on-error-propagate>
  </error-handler>
</try>
----

> * The scopes root element `<try />` has configurable attributes described in <<reference>>.

Author: ```suggestion
* The scope's root element `<try />` has configurable attributes described in <<reference>>.
```

* Components that execute under the scope's error handling rules are child elements of `<try />`. You can place one or many components within the Try scope.

* A single `<error-handler>` element holds all error handling strategies that you define for the scope.

> * Within the error handler, define the strategies within one or more On Error Continue (`<on-error-continue />`) and On Error Propagate (`<on-error-propagate />`) error handlers. On Error Propagate (`<on-error-propagate />`) is the default for any (`ANY`) error.

Author: ```suggestion
* Within the error handler, define the strategies within one or more On Error Continue (`<on-error-continue />`) and On Error Propagate (`<on-error-propagate />`) error handlers. On Error Propagate (`<on-error-propagate />`) is the default for any (`ANY`) error type.
```

* Components and operations that you add as children to On Error components execute when a matching error that you configure (such as `ANY` or `DB:CONNECTIVITY`) occurs within the Try scope.

See <<error_handling>> for more information about Mule error handling components.

[[transactions]]
== Managing Transactions

> //TODO: DO WE HAVE A LIST OF COMPONENTS AND OPERATIONS THAT SUPPORT TRANSACTIONS

Author: yes, sort of, see "The only components that can define the transaction type are message sources (For example, jms:listener and vm:listener) and the Try scope." in https://docs.mulesoft.com/mule-runtime/4.4/transaction-management#transaction-types

//TODO: HOW TO TELL IF A COMPONENT IS TREATED AS PART OF THE TRANSACTION?
//TODO: CAN A COMPONENT W/O A TRANSACTIONAL ACTION OPTION be part of a transaction?

A transaction is a series of actions that fail or succeed as a group. If the execution of one component or operation that is part of the transaction fails, the entire transaction fails. A transaction can be Local (single resource) or an XA transaction. XA transactions can group a series of operations from different transactional resources, such as VM, JMS, or Database operations, into a single, reliable global transaction.
//TODO: WHAT DOES COMMIT MEAN? COMMITS WHERE?
Success or failure depends on whether the errors propagate and roll back the transaction, or whether an error handler commits the transaction. For configuration options, see <<reference>>.
//TODO: Really continues? Propagate doesn't seem to continue.
//See source:
//https://docs.mulesoft.com/mule-runtime/4.4/try-scope-concept#handling-transactions
In both cases, the flow in which the Try scope resides continues.

In the Anypoint Studio UI, transaction options look like this:

image::transaction-try-scope-config.png[Try Scope Configuration]

> The following example shows a JMS Listener `<jms:listener />` operation that starts a transaction at flow level, a Try scope that sets a `transactionalAction` value based on a predefined xref:configuring-properties.adoc[configuration property] `${action}`, and a `<jms:publish />` operation configured to run outside of the transaction:

Author: ```suggestion
The following example shows a JMS Listener `<jms:listener />` operation that starts a transaction at the flow level, a Try scope that sets a `transactionalAction` value based on a custom xref:configuring-properties.adoc[configuration property] `${action}`, and a `<jms:publish />` operation configured to run outside of the transaction:
```

+
If the Try scope's `transactionalAction` is set to this value in the example, the transaction continues while executing the operations within the scope, unless that behavior is overridden within the scope.
//TODO: Re "propagates to the source" below,
//      WHERE DOES THE ERROR PROPAGATE TO? THE SCOPE OR THE FLOW OR WHERE?
When raised within the Try scope, the error propagates to the source by default, the transaction rolls back, and the message becomes available again in the JMS queue. This rollback does not affect the completed `<jms:publish />` operation, which is outside of the transaction scope because its `transactionAction` property is set to `NOT_SUPPORTED`.
+
To roll back the `<jms:publish />` operation as part of the transaction, it is necessary to use the default setting (`JOIN_IF_POSSIBLE`) or to configure the setting `transactionAction="ALWAYS_JOIN"`.
+
* Always Begin (`ALWAYS_BEGIN`)
+
//TODO: WHAT HAPPENS IN THIS CASE?
If the Try scope's `transactionalAction` is set to this value in the example, an error occurs because an active transaction started by `<jms:listener ... transactionalAction="ALWAYS_BEGIN"/>` already exists.
* Begin or Join (`BEGIN_OR_JOIN`)
+

> If the Try scope's `transactionalAction` is set to this value in the example, the scope joins the active transaction started by `<jms:listener ... transactionalAction="ALWAYS_BEGIN"/>`. The result is the same as in `INDIFFERENT`.

Author: ```suggestion
If the Try scope's `transactionalAction` is set to this value in the example, the scope joins the active transaction started by `<jms:listener ... transactionalAction="ALWAYS_BEGIN"/>`. In this case, the result is the same as using `INDIFFERENT`.
```

		<error-handler >
		  <!-- On Error Propagate for DB:CONNECTIVITY errors -->
			<on-error-propagate enableNotifications="true" logException="true" doc:name="On Error Propagate" type="DB:CONNECTIVITY">
				<logger level="INFO" doc:name="Logger"
				        message="#[onErrorPropagate : error]"/>
			</on-error-propagate>
			<!-- On Error Continue for ANY other errors -->
			<on-error-continue enableNotifications="true" logException="true" doc:name="On Error Continue" type="ANY">
				<logger level="INFO" doc:name="Logger"
				        message="#[onErrorContinue : error.description]"/>
			</on-error-continue>
		</error-handler>
	</try>
	<!-- Logger After Try Scope -->
	<logger level="INFO" doc:name="Logger" message='"Example: Logger After Try"'/>
</flow>
----

In this example, a database connection error `DB:CONNECTIVITY` propagates because of the On Error Propagate (`<on-error-propagate />`) error handler. Propagation of this error causes the Try scope's (`<try />`) execution to fail and the scope's error handler to execute the Logger within the Try scope but not the Logger after the scope:

[source,logs]
----
INFO  ...LoggerMessageProcessor: {onErrorPropagate=DB:CONNECTIVITY}
----

> On Error Continue (`on-error-continue`) treats other errors that occur within the scope as successful, which enables the Logger with _and after_ the Try scope to execute.

Author: ```suggestion
On Error Continue (`on-error-continue`) accepts other errors that occur within the scope. The Logger within _and after_ the Try scope execute when these errors occur.
```

[source,logs]
----
INFO  ...LoggerMessageProcessor: {onErrorContinue=DB:BAD_SQL_SYNTAX}
INFO  ...LoggerMessageProcessor: "Example: Logger After Try"
----

After a component within the Try scope raises an exception, any subsequent components in the scope _do not_ execute, regardless of the type of error handler that catches the exception.

> Each error handling strategy in a Try scope (`on-error-*`) follows a condition. This condition is typically an error type (or a list of several) which must match the current error. You can also define this condition as a freely written expression, such as `error.cause.message.contains("fatal")`.

Author: ```suggestion
Each error handling strategy in a Try scope (`on-error-*`) follows a condition. This condition is typically an error type (or a list of several) which must match the current error. You can also define this condition as a DataWeave expression, such as `error.cause.message.contains("fatal")`.
```

[NOTE]

> Conditions are evaluated in order and only the first strategy to match is executed.

Author: ```suggestion
Conditions are evaluated in order, and only the first strategy to match is executed.
```
